# Mental Models

Growing up, we become accustomed to think like the others without questioning why things are done in a certain way. We then believe this is the way things are.

> "When a certain worldview dominates your thinking, you’ll try to explain every problem you face through that worldview." — James Clear

How do we change that? By training our brains to think better. To think better, expand your set of mental models.[^s1] 

Ever wondered what makes a person an outlier? Outliers resist the habit of following the gut/instincts—they switch to mental models instead. They see things differently because they have a broader set of mental models. Examples of outliers include Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk, Warren Buffett.

A mental model guides our perception and behavior. It shapes how we think and affects everything we do. Mental models help us **optimise systems** (assessing how systems work) and how they help us make **better decisions**.

There are 1,000+ mental models in the world but we only need to learn a few dozen to grasp how the world works. Block 20 minutes weekly to reflect and run our life decisions through mental models from the third-person point of view.

Here are some mental models that I find interesting:
- [[first-principles]]
- [[local-global]]
- [[regret-minimisation]]
- [[pareto-principle]]

[^s1]: [James Clear: Mental Models](https://jamesclear.com/mental-models)

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[first-principles]: mental-models/first-principles "First Principles"
[local-global]: mental-models/local-global "Local or Global"
[regret-minimisation]: mental-models/regret-minimisation "Regret Minimisation"
[pareto-principle]: mental-models/pareto-principle "Pareto Principle"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"